---
layout: post
title: "VI Mode"
modified:
categories:
excerpt:
tags: []
image:
  feature:
date: 2016-08-17 19:46:46
---
I started using VIM as my editor for programming and general use. That also
meant switching my command line environment shortcuts to VI rather than Emacs.

This post highlights a few interesting problems I had and how I solved them.
For a shell I use ZSH and my terminal emulator is Gnome-terminal. I should
probably start using Tmux as well but haven't yet really gotten into the habit.

* VI mode in ZSH (perhaps BASH for others)
* Remap `escape` key
    * xmodmap
        * xmodmap command in .*rc files didn't work as expected
    * script to customize gnome terminal
* command history search `control R`

# VI keybindings
I put the following in my `.zshrc` file.

{% highlight bash %}
# VI mode
bindkey -v
{% endhighlight %}

# Command History Search

If you use VI keybindings, then `control r` command history is broken. I found a fix on SO as I recall, here it is:

{% highlight bash %}
# enable Cnt R for search history: required with VI mode bindings on
bindkey "^r" history-incremental-search-backward
{% endhighlight %}


# Xmodmap
I put the following code into a file named `.Xmodmap`.

{% highlight bash %}
    remove Lock = Caps_Lock
    keycode 66 = Escape
    keycode 9 = Caps_Lock
    add Lock = Caps_Lock
{% endhighlight %}

## Xmodmap in a script

{% highlight bash %}
#!/bin/zsh
# Check if Escape has been mapped to Caps_Lock

bool=$(xmodmap -pm | grep lock | grep -c "\(0x9\)")
if [ $bool -eq 0 ]; then
    source /home/daniel/.zprofile
    # log located in "/var/log/syslog"
    logger -i -t "remap Escape" "Escape key re-mapped to Caps-Lock"
fi
{% endhighlight %}

# Terminal Short Cut

When I open a terminal I like the dimsenions of the screen to be full height of
the screen and an 80 character width. Gnome terminal has command line arguments
for this.

After the terminal is opened, I want xmodmap to remap my keys for me.

{% highlight bash %}
    gnome-terminal --geometry=80x1000
    caps_map
{% endhighlight %}


Now I have a working VI mode where Escape is mapped to the Caps Lock key, my terminal opens to decent dimensions and my command history search works. I'm pleased for mow.

Next up, Tmux configuration that I like.
